---
layout: post
title: What's in a name?
date: Apr 30, 1916
summary: "in which I attempt humor"
permalink: name
---

Okay, explaining a joke definitely ruins it (especially if it wasn't a particularly good one in the first place), but I need a second test post to make sure the date ordering system works. So, without further ado, the rationale behind the name of this blog:

**Theorem:** The phrase `console.blog()` exhibits comedic value.

**Proof:** In Javascript, the DOM method `console.log()` (predictably) writes a message to the console. This is sort of like writing to `stdout` in C with `printf()`. "Log" happens to be both visually and auditorily (is that a word?) similar to "blog." Actually, [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog) reliably informs me that "blog" is simply the truncated form of "weblog," itself the conjoined form of "web" and "log." The phrase `console.blog()` thus makes reference to a well-known Javascript method while clearly indicating that the subject is a blog; in fact, we can prove the stronger conjecture that this reference is pertinent to the subject matter of the blog (i.e. computers). The formal name for such a reference is a "pun of the [worst kind](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/FirstKind.html)." Thus, we have shown the jocular nature of the title of the blog containing this post, concluding the proof.

Historical note: the phrase `console.blog("salve, munde!")` was the title of my junior English blog. This is yet another pun on the ubiquitous `"hello world"` introductory program, except with a Latin twist. The proof of its hilarity is left as an exercise for the reader.

---

Bonus points: can you determine the pattern to the dates for the three "pseudo-posts" (the first three to show up on the index page)?

`Update`: The prize has been claimed by **Rishi Salwi**, who correctly deduced that the dates were all birthdays of famous computer scientists (specifically, Alonzo Church, Claude Shannon, and Donald Knuth). Church was known for inventing the lambda calculus, a theoretical expression for computation; Shannon was the father of information theory; Knuth designed TeX and wrote *The Art of Computer Programming*. As his prize, Rishi Salwi will receive an **original** Dr. Agrawal star, straight from one of my Algebra II quizzes.
